and any potential involvement by outsiders?
Well, as I had just mentioned, the thing I guess I'm proudest of is that no one that I have known or any system
None has been set up to get anyone into veterinary college unless they ranked in the top of the computerized selection system.
No political pressure, as far as I know, has ever gotten anyone into the college.
Let me enter as an editorial note a memory of being in President Jack Williams' office one day.
He got a call from a very well-known, wealthy oil man, former student, who apparently had promised his secretary that he would get her nephew admitted to the NM vet program.
Dr. Williams very tactfully tried to tell him that there was a search process, that he as president would not get involved,
I could tell that the former student's temperament was getting more and more alarmed and angry, and very soon he was cussing Dr. Williams and ended up by telling him, you son of a bitch, I'm going to get you fired because I made a commitment and you're supposed to do what I tell you to do.
Dr. Williams at first was chuckling over the interview and then became very serious.
When he hung up, he turned to me and seriously asked, what if there were ten slots in each first year class for veterinary medicine which were selected by the president?
What was my opinion of that idea?
Off the top of my head, I said, Dr. Williams, once that becomes known, and it would become known, 10 times 10 times 10 slots would not be enough.
He quickly agreed with that opinion.
went out of his way to indicate that as far as he was aware, the admissions process at the NM College of Veterinary Medicine had always been far above politics, money, or anything else.
In hindsight,
In hindsight, can you think of any modifications that should have been made in the admissions process?
Well, fortunately one of my colleagues in the department spent
25 years in the selection process and trying to improve on it and trying to find better ways to select students.
And these people that are on the selection committee, it really just takes everything out of them.
They get so involved with the kids and the selection and all that, and it's really a hard task.
But he began the computerization of data and looking at selection and chances for graduation versus the criteria selected on, et cetera.
He found one outstanding
criterion that seemed to be the best predictor of finishing veterinary college, and that was if you finished in the top 10 percent of your high school class.
you had a very good chance of finishing veterinary medicine.
Better predictor than grade point average or anything else.
And regardless of the size of the high school or the number of graduates in the class or anything else, and what he finally decided was that
A person that finishes in the top ten percent of his high school class is a very conscientious person.
He does all of his homework assignments.
He makes all of his deadlines.
He wants to excel.
And so he found that to be the most important thing to consider.
Describe
describe the relationship between the College of Veterinary Medicine and the A&M Medical Program.
Well, the A&M Medical Program is still a very young college, of course.
The main relationship was probably in the
the establishment of the College of Medicine.
The veterinary colleges and certain individuals within the college were most involved in developing a relationship with Baylor College of Medicine, which was important.
Since the Baylor supported the
founding of a college at A&M and was to serve as the clinical arm of a two-year college of medicine at A&M.
And so most of the relationship with the veterinary college was early on in helping to bring the medical college here.
And since then, over time, there have been some joint
joint appointments, faculty appointments, joint research efforts.
I know I used to take most of the graduate students in the medical school, receive their degree through my department.
because the medical school was not large enough and did not have a graduate degree program.
And so we used to cooperate on graduate degrees, joint hiring of faculty.
One spouse might be a veterinarian, one spouse a physician, and we would jointly hire those people between the two colleges.
I think as time goes on and the College of Medicine matures and begins to develop greater research and
activities that the two will be much more involved.
Has the creation of the medical program helped the library resources available to veterinary medicine?
Well, yes.
I would think that the New Medical Sciences Library, not new but relatively new, which has a large volume of collections and journals especially,
And it was a result of a joint request by the veterinary school and the medical school for funding to get a separate library.
And it's a good library.
It's connected.
The library is connected by an underground system so that both colleges can have free access to it.
As you look back over
How many years?
What year did you first enter veterinary medicine classes?
I first entered Texas A&M in 1948.
Right.
So more than a half century.
Compare the program in veterinary medicine then and now.
I was fortunate to enter the veterinary school in 1954.
At that time, Dr. Armstead was dean.
He made some very drastic changes in the professionalism of the student body.
With his coming in, he saw that all the students were clothed in white and very clean, that they were active in various student affairs, and he really made the veterinary student a professional student.
And then as the college progressed in its educational programs, with more students and more faculty, began to develop a significant research program and has had many firsts in the country as far as veterinary medicine.
Howdy, how are you doing?
Have you met Dr. Monroe before?
We were comparing then and now.
Veterinary classes when you were admitted were how many?
64.
And the veterinary program was over in the building near the system.
Well, they were over on the main campus at that time.
We had to move off campus because of the animals.
And we had three or four buildings over there that eventually were turned over to engineering and other... And the faculty was about how many when you were...
Oh, probably our faculty didn't have, the whole college probably didn't have 30 faculty or so back in that day.
And as far as you know, what might have been the total research budget?
Oh, I would imagine $5,000 maybe.
And the animals, some of them were housed on the main campus and others were west of the tracks?
Well, nearly all of our animals were on main campus.
Up there where we have the bonfire now and everything, that was our veterinary pastures up there.
And most of the research in that era was being done on what species of animals?
The main research was what Dr. Francis had been involved in, and that was tick fever, Texas cattle fever, and anaplasma, and pyroplasmosis, and some toxic plant research.
Was it even standard terminology then to refer to small animal or large animal veterinary practice?
Well, it was...
Yeah, I guess it was.
That's evolved over time from equine, primary equine, into small animal and pets.
And now they pretty well have broken it down into food animal medicine.
All those things are edible and they don't consider horses in this country edible.
Most are owned by Texas has a million horses, and 90% of them belong to ladies.
And so they're referred to as companion animals, along with dogs, cats, and so forth.
All right, now we're getting close to the end.
As you look back over all these years, what are Texas A&M Veterinary Medicine's greatest pluses,
And if there are any minuses, what do the veterinary program do best and least well?
Well, I think it's always had a very solid foundation for educating future veterinarians.
And I think that still has to be its primary mission.
After all, molecular research
the evolving of that has made the cell look the same for humans and animals.
And so if we can educate the students, we're probably the, I mean, that's our mission.
Nobody else can educate students to be veterinarians except the Veterinary College.
However, the research can be cut across all disciplines, and yet veterinary research, the capability of maintaining animals and caring for animals, and as I was just visiting with Dr. Fossum, developing the anesthetic protocol
the pharmaceuticals for animals and helping other disciplines probably is something that's unique to the veterinarian and right now veterinarians are highly involved in all animal research in medicine, biology departments and everywhere else because of the fact that all
laboratory animals have to be supervised and given veterinary care.
But our basic mission here of education is still primary even in the turn of the century.
Our research program, however, has grown tremendously and
is recognized worldwide for its work in toxicology and the development of the animal or bovine genome and all of the new orthopedic activities and equine and many, many things.
Then we collaborate with lots of people.
Dr. Fossman was just visiting with us.
heads up the DeBakey Institute here where they're developing new heart assist devices and studies in cardiovascular research.
As you look at it, are there some new areas of research to which Texas A&M ought to give more emphasis than it is now?
Well, that's seeing far into the future.
I've seen research come from, as I mentioned before, when we were taking cellular biology or histology, cellular anatomy,
At the time all the thing recognized in the cell was the nucleus and nucleolus and cytoplasma and the cell wall.
And at the present at the molecular level all the DNA and the interrelationships of the ribosomes and everything else in the cell and the cloning and the splitting and the changing of the genetic material in the cells and now stem cell research and
just the evolution to that level, and the closer you get to the cellular level in the stem cell, the closer you get to the fact that both animal and human are made up of the same DNA.
So I think the point in time will come when organs will be completely transferable from animals to man.
and be able to replace all the organs with animal organs, be able to use stem cells to change the genetic makeup of individuals that might have some genetic disease.
And these things look a little futuristic, but the way that science is changing now each day,
perhaps within the next 10 years all these things will be that we think are way in the future will be in place.
And it's already predicted the life expectancy of man to exceed 125 years by the mid-century.
During all these years that you've been a professional here, what did you and your family do for fun, for relaxation?
Initially, the fact that I was in school for about 30 years and with a family, I had a first child when I entered veterinary school and I went through veterinary school and went.
Through PhD programs and all those, we had and then practiced and then worked on top of all of that, too.
We didn't have lots of time.
We didn't have the money or the resources to have much recreation, except I spent about
10 or 15 years coaching the Little League and teenage baseball and things like that.
We liked to fish and hunt.
Where did you normally fish and hunt?
Well, primarily hunted all over the state of Texas.
Deer?
No, just quail.
And then fishing where?
Oh, primarily local fishing.
Any hobbies?
Do you collect anything?
No.
I don't do anything but fishing, hunting, and my
My kids, we tried to stay active in church and them active in church.
Which church?
A&M Church of Christ.
We built a new building while we were in all of this time.
My kids were all active in school, so there wasn't a great deal of outside things to do here.
Okay, we're near the end now, and so you're the consultant.
First of all, we have hired you as the consultant to advise the department that you've served for so long.
Give them advice about the future.
What should they do?
As a department head, your main task is recruiting the best faculty and then providing them a place to work.
And I think the thing that used to be
What caused me more anxiety than anything else was losing faculty from time to time.
I finally got a philosophy that if I lost a faculty member, I was going to hire a better one.
And so I tried to take the attitude that the loss of faculty was a good thing, because I was going to get a better replacement.
But I think the main thing about the department is having good people, and I don't mean just capable scientists,
that are morally strong and family oriented and are loyal to the institution.
I think these are all very important things and can work with other people.
Okay, now you're advising the college's leadership.
What advice would you give the dean, the president, the chancellor, the board of regents and so forth about veterinary medicine?
I think to recognize that the students that are recruited into the program are the
cream of the crop for the state of Texas, and they are the most important thing that goes on in the college, and they should be providing the resources to get excellent education.
I think the people that are
and the faculty and people that are doing research and the graduate students need an opportunity facility-wise to have a place to work, and I have thoughts as to how that can be done.
But I think the faculty member
predominately in the research field should be responsible for procurement of outside funding to take care of his basic research and should add to the
faculty, they should be an integrated part of the faculty and shouldn't feel that they are just superior because they have large research grants.
And recently we've been able to get a chair for
someone in teaching, educational chair, try to make teachers as important to the administration as the researcher.
Are the facilities comparatively adequate?
Do there need to be additional facilities?
Well, I sent a proposal to the
Vice President and Vice Chancellor for Research last week.
They were talking about needing facilities for the private sector and also for research.
And I sent him a proposal, which I had made 15, 20 years ago and got approved, but nothing was ever done, to build research buildings out on the research farm.
or research annex or park, using service bonds.
In other words, you don't have to use university money.
If you build a general purpose research facility, then let the, as a researcher gets large grants and expands his program, he'll also be able to get money for leasing additional space.
And then if a certain private sector individual comes along that's got a good program and needs space, they would always keep these buildings projected ahead so that you've always got some vacant space coming up.
And this can all be done on service bondage like you do at the dormitory or a parking garage or anything else.
You don't have to use university resources to do it.
How large should the admission classes be?
Should they remain about the same or more or less?
Well, I think they remained at 50 or 60 for many years.
They've been at 130 for a number of years.
Some practitioners are
having to go to Oklahoma and Louisiana and places to find students.
So evidently we have a, we're at a near balance in the state, I think.
You'd have to
look at the projections for the state population increase.
I guess Texas is running 19 million now or so.
And they have pretty well some ideas how many veterinarians you should have per capita or numbers of people.
It used to be a veterinarian per 10,000 or something like that, but I haven't kept up with it.
But I think you just have to look at the population growth.
and the animal population growth and types of animals and these kinds of things.
Surely people that are in administration now are looking at things like that.
All right.
Have we left anything out?
I don't think so.
Then the last question I can think of is how do you feel about the College of Veterinary Medicine at Texas A&M?
Well, to speak to, I guess, Texas A&M itself first, it's pretty well directed my entire life and career by just coming to Texas A&M in 1948.
It's been the foundation all the way through for what I've done as a student, as an employee, and as a profession, and a little of everything.
And so I've felt real good about it.
receiving an education here.
I know everybody is proud of where they go to school and where they graduate from.
Having been involved
academics throughout the United States and somewhat throughout a great part of the world.
I always find that A&M is in a good leadership position and well recognized.
You have to realize that the fact that we're a public university, receive state funding, have lots of federal funding and research, and then have a rather large endowment, we are a very unique university and have more resources than nearly universities than nearly any other state and, of course, in lots of other countries.
So it's a good place to be and have them.